---
title: Laser Cutter Projects
published_at: 2016-04-03T21:23:24.000Z
modified_at: 
snippet: I never knew I was an artist until they let me play with lasers.
tags: Danny Wahl
authors: Danny Wahl
---

> I never knew I was an artist until the let me play with lasers _‚ÄêMe_

## Background

A couple of years ago now one of the schools I was working with told me they
wanted to start a Maker Space. I didn't realize it but they had brought me into
the conversation fairly late.

They had already decided that they were going to buy a laser cutter, in fact
they had already purchased it. They wanted to know if I could learn to use it,
come up with safety procedures, train some other staff, and help develop
classroom application.

Initially I thought "what a terrible idea." In fact, I still kind of do. They
spent the entire year's budget for the space on one machine. That's not so
practical when it comes to classroom application. I would have much rather
bought $10,000 worth of circuit boards, soldering irons, cardboard, fabric,
sewing machines, etc... But hey, what was done was done.

At least the machine they ended up getting was really nice. Industrial quality
textile-cutting laser with a cutting area of about 3' x 4'. That's enough to
make some massive projects.

Over the course of a year I spent a fair amount of time with the machine,
learning the ins and outs of how how to use it, developing safety protocols,
classroom projects, and maybe (hopefully) exposing myself to some
[gamma radiation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hulk_(comics)).

![Radiation Warning](/blog/laser-cutter-projects/friggin-lasers.jpg)

Seriously though, if you don't close the radiation hood you'll have a pretty
good headache after about 15 minutes of operation.

Anyways, I don't consider myself a particularly creative person- and definitely
not a _visually_ creative person. I'm terrible with color schemes, bad at UI/UX
(which is why I love working with APIs so much), but for some reason I just got
totally creative - literally _creating things_ with the laser. Here are some of
the projects I created.

## Material Templates

I made a bunch of these templates out of different materials, effectively trying
to eliminate the guess-work and minimize material waste. Across the top is the
material type and laser settings. As well as cut-speed at 10%, 20%, etc... and
etch-speed in increments of 5%.

![Laser Material Templates](/blog/laser-cutter-projects/material-template.jpg)

These turned out to be one of the most valuable resources I made.

## iPad Case

We even played with etching names onto iPad cases. That was a fun one, and
apparently there's big money to be made in this. I'll tell you a secret, it's
like 5 minutes worth of work.

![Laser Etched iPad Case](/blog/laser-cutter-projects/IMG_20141124_093025.jpg)

## Ring Calendar

This calendar was really fun. Again, I don't know where I got the idea, I just
kind of came up with it. It's 3 concentric circles, months, dates, and days. I
made it for my wife for our anniversary that year. I think she liked it except
for the fact that she had to remember to change it every day...

![My Calendar](/blog/laser-cutter-projects/IMG_20141124_200801.jpg)

## MacBook City Map Case

This one was really fun. I downloaded the XML from the open maps project for
Tianjin, converted it to a vector image, cropped it, removed a bunch of stuff
except major roads and highways and then flipped it horizontally and etched it
on the inside of a MacBook case. The yellow coloring is actually trapped plastic
smoke. I'd love to do this one again with a better quality material.

![Tianjin Map](/blog/laser-cutter-projects/tianjin-map.jpg)

## Custom Journal

A lot of these projects were simply throwing materials at the laser (or vice
versa technically...) and seeing what it could do. I was also playing around
with Adobe Illustrator a lot to learn new tricks. I brought a faux-leather
journal from home and traced the letter "M" on the cover with a floral pattern
inlay and etched my daughter's name on the spine.

![Journal Cover](/blog/laser-cutter-projects/journal-cover.jpg)

![Journal Spine](/blog/laser-cutter-projects/journal-spine.jpg)

## Basketball

This is where I feel it's important to mention that there are different types of
laser cutters. The one we had was for textiles and so moved horizontally on an X
and Y axis. It could only handle flat objects. There are other types of lasers
which the laser is stationary and 3D objects are moved/rotated under the laser
(for etching like mugs, etc...). We tried anyways and put the school's name on a
basketball. Notice how the edges are faded as the laser power decreases with
distance.

![basketball](/blog/laser-cutter-projects/basketball.jpg)

How thrilled would your IT staff be to get to engrave all the school property
with a laser instead of a label maker?!

## Christmas Ornaments

I spent a full quarter working with 8th graders teaching them the fundamentals
of Adobe Illustrator and vector images. It culminated in a project to create a
Christmas ornament which we cut out on the machine. Here's something that's
really cool: We used cardboard to prototype, so we were able to do 3 or 4
"drafts" before we cut the final ones out of wood. Here's another thing that's
really cool. When kids watch the laser cut out their project and it gets
completely demolished you have _far_ more "oh!" moments than you do repeatedly
explaining it in a classroom.

![Ornaments Cutting](/blog/laser-cutter-projects/ornaments-cutting.jpg)

![Ornaments Cut](/blog/laser-cutter-projects/ornaments-cut.jpg)

![Wooden Ornaments](/blog/laser-cutter-projects/wooden-ornaments.jpg)

## Coffee Rocket

Even though the laser can only cut vertically, there is a degree of tolerance,
it works really well for writing vertically on cylinders. Here's a rocket coffee
mug one of the teachers bought for her dad. We etched his name on it.

![blast off](/blog/laser-cutter-projects/rocket-coffee.jpg)

## Photo Frame

My friend's wife came up with this vision, it's a sort of layered photo frame.
The front layer is grass and leaves and the back layer is trunks.

After I gave it to her she painted a landscape behind it, unfortunately I don't
have a picture of the finished project, but you get the idea.

![photo frame](/blog/laser-cutter-projects/trees.jpg)

## Chess Board

The crown-jewel of my creations was this chess board. I don't remember how I
came up with the idea but I thought that a faux-3D chess board would be so cool.
I spent quite a few hours in illustrator laying this out (grr... math.) It's 5
layers of balsa wood with a plexiglass top. I love this thing, in fact it's like
the only project I kept.

![Check](/blog/laser-cutter-projects/chessboard1.jpg)

![Checkmate](/blog/laser-cutter-projects/chessboard2.jpg)

## Conclusion

I love laser cutters. I think that a laser cutter would make a great _addition_
to an already vibrant maker space, but it's not the tool I would pick to _start_
one due to high cost entry, moderate learning curve, and the fact that they're
so big it's not feasible to have more than one. That said, they are a wonderful
complement to STEAM programs. I would argue that these projects are some of the
most artistic, creative things I've done in my life, but they are highly
technical and precision engineered (well most of them).

If you're thinking of adding a laser cutter to your arsenal, or already have
one, and are trying to figure out some inspirational projects or
project-based-learning projects feel free to take any of these ideas listed
above. Just be sure to have fun!
