---
title: Should Students be Content Creators?
published_at: 2016-03-03T02:40:39.000Z
modified_at: 
snippet: 
tags: Education
authors: Danny Wahl
---

In my experience, the rhetoric of "we want our students to be content _creators_
not content _consumers_" is used ad nauseum by faculty and admins for all kinds
of purposes. Maybe it's invoked to shut-down a 1:1 initiative or maybe it's just
to
[complain about the youth](http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/63219-the-children-now-love-luxury-they-have-bad-manners-contempt).

This argument, I find, is generally indefensible as it ignores the fact that the
kids are probably not creating anything _now_ (through no fault of their own-
they don't choose curricula) and the adults invoking this ad hominem attack are
nothing but content consumers themselves. But the biggest problem I have is that
the argument is based on a simple
[framing error](http://schoolsucksproject.com/podcast-414/) and that is that
content creation and content consumption are mutually exclusive.

I propose an alternative idea, and that is consumption and creation are
progressive, if not cyclical. Everybody must consume media in order to create
it. Ok, **must** is a generalization but let me make my argument... Is there a
director out there, famous or otherwise, who would say, "I have no mentors, no
inspiration, my style is my own."? Is there a musician who would say, "I've
never heard music before I started making music."? I submit that the answer is
"no."

This is not to say that every person who consumes media will necessarily become
a de facto content creator, certainly the vast majority of history bears strong
evidence to the contrary. Rather, we should be teaching students to move _from_
consumption to _creation_ or to start tipping the scales from 100/0
consumption/creation to 90/10 then 80/20, and so forth. Again, even once someone
is renown for their artistic endeavors they hardly **stop** consuming new
inspiration, they just spend the majority of their time creating. Maybe for them
the scales have tipped to 80/20 or 90/10 in favor of creation.

So what does this progression look like? Well like all good pedagogy it neatly
fits into an easy-to-remember, easier-said-than-done, rule. I call it "The Four
'C's of Creation". They are progressive, but can be cyclical as well.

- Consume: The person intakes media with no analysis or output
- Cherish: The person intakes media with internal and/or external analysis and
  no output
- Curate: The person intakes media with internal and/or external analysis and
  derivative output
- Create: The person intakes media with internal and/or external analysis and
  original output

Let's take two examples, one generic and one unique to school.

A person listens to music passively on the radio (ha! what's a radio?!). The
person discovers a band that they really enjoy learns about the members, the
history, the discography, has a favorite song, etc... The person starts creating
mix tapes (ha! what's a tape?!) and playlists and sharing them with others. The
person starts playing with audio recording creating covers and remixes of the
band's songs, sharing them with others. The person starts creating their own
unique songs which sounds very similar to the band's songs but over time grow
into their own.

In first grade students spend a month reading Dr. Seuss books. In third grade
students have to do an oral/written (er... typed) report on your favorite Dr.
Seuss book (I won't get into why they
[have to](http://www.cantrip.org/gatto.html) like Dr. Seuss...). In 6th grade
they have to write their own poem a l√° Dr. Seuss. In 10th grade they write their
own poetry (which can be assigned to the first graders! what?!)

Finally, it should be noted that the creation of
[_good_](http://www.amazon.com/Zen-Art-Motorcycle-Maintenance-Inquiry/dp/0060589469/)
content across all mediums is simply not feasible and the burden of that goal
should not be hoisted upon students. Certainly that is an unbearable yoke and we
should not be shaming them for simply consuming media. I am not a musical person
by any means, and I have never made it past the "cherish" stage listed above.
Should I be shamed for this? Should I be guilted into learning an instrument and
pretending to have ambitions that simply do not exist? No. I create other things
as I consume. I write, I code, I debate (believe it or not, that's an art).

In conclusion I posit that consumption itself is not bad. It's our failure as
educators, partially as the result of a framing error, that we do not encourage
children to progress from consumption into creation. If we can re-frame our
thinking on the purpose of consumption and encourage students to use it as
inspiration, then we will see (mildly) transformative change in the realm of
artistic creative endeavors in our schools.
